# FuStIP - Full Stack IO Profiling

This tool aims to provide full stack profiling of IO on a system, mainly build
up by bpf - therefore supporting Linux Kernel tracing. `pidstat` is used for
syswide metrics, like cpu/memory/disk usage, for somewhat of a baseline of a
system profile. For bpf, the tool uses two modes:

- _summary_: using `bpftrace` to build and output a summary IO profile, based
    on the tools/functionality the tool provides. This mode will output the
    aggregated results at the end of the script.
- _detailed_: using `c` wrapper scripts, providing deeper insights and a time
    series output - currently formatted as csv.

The interface of the tool will be described in more detail below, but some
general details on filtering are:

- Both _summary_ and _detailed_ mode can profile by `comm` (command name) for
    command filtering, and `dev` (device name) for NVMe device filtering.
- For _detailed_ mode, two options are currently available; filter
    by `comm`/`dev` or `container`. Container filtering uses mount namespace
    to dynamically resolve the container's namespace at runtime.


## Repo Structure
This repo/tool is structured into some different sub directories, briefly
described here:

    FuStIP
    |-  layers/                 (Supported Layers for IO Profiling)
    |   |-  block/              (Block layer)
    |   |-  fs/                 (File System layer)
    |   |-  nvme/               (NVMe layer)
    |   |-  sysstat/            (syswide metrics, cpu/mem/disk)
    |- tests/                   (Tests/Workloads for different Layers)
    |   |-  block_nvme/         (block and nvme layer)
    |   |-  filesystem/         (fs and sysstat layer)
    |- util/                    (shared utility/scripts for tool)
    |- results/                 (results dir, generated by tool)
    |- devbox.json              (devbox file, see prerequisites)


## Prerequisites
This tool provides a `devbox.json` file, declaring packages+versions needed
for using the tool. Please, refer to [DevBox Docs](https://www.jetify.com/docs/devbox)
for details on how to install and use, but follow this for a brief guide:

1. Install with `curl -fsSL https://get.jetify.com/devbox | bash`
2. Run command `devbox run update_pip` the first time you are setting up the tool
3. Use `devbox shell` anywhere within this repo to enter the DevBox shell,
    which will include all packages required to use the tool

You can also try and use the tool without DevBox, in which case the packages
specified in the `devbox.json` file are still needed, but you will have to
ensure the correct versions etc. yourself. It is highly recommended to use
DevBox, using Nix package manager under the hood, as it will provide everything
needed.


## Test Suite
The tool aims to ensure stability through a _Flexible I/O Tester_ (fio) test
suite, providing different workloads for validating tool correctness under both
low and high load. Please, refer to the test dir for details on this, and note
that it is divided into fs+syswide and block+nvme workload, basically
differentiating between syscalls and requests inside the kernel.

These workloads are inspired by mimicking Vector DB workloads, as this tool has
been build concurrently with such exploration, but should be expanded in the future.


## Using the tool
For detailed insights into using the tool, please refer to the help pages of
the CLI, e.g. by `./run.sh --help`. However, we provide some general use examples
below. The `run.sh` script is a simple wrapper, which will use a python script
for parsing. This parsed cmd from python will then be passed to the shell.

Be aware that using this tool as part of another tool requires the correct
packages. Hence, the easiest strategy is to either propagate the DevBox setup
'up' to the wrapping tool, or simply start FuStIP inside the provided DevBox
environment, and then running the relevant workload elsewhere - requiring also
stopping FuStIP inside the DevBox.

> [!NOTE]
> The CLI of this tool support a `--dry` option, which will output the parsed
> command(s) for running the tool. This can be useful for using the tool as
> part of a pipeline of another tool/setup.

### Start IO Profiling
**For all layers for a fio process with nvme dev nvme0n1**:

    ./run.sh profile start -l all -p fio -d nvme0n1

**For specified layers**:

    ./run.sh profile start -l block,nvme -p fio -d nvme0n1

**For specified commands (without nvme layer)**:

    ./run.sh profile start -l block,fs -p fio

**For specified containers**:

    ./run.sh profile start -c fio-container

**Run detailed mode**:

    ./run.sh profile start -m detailed -p fio -d nvme0n1

**Clean existing results before running tool**:

    ./run.sh profile start --clean -p fio -d nvme0n1

### Stop IO Profiling
**For all layers**:

    ./run.sh profile stop -p fio -d nvme0n1

**Generate visualizations with results**:

    ./run.sh profile stop --visualize -m detailed -p fio -d nvme0n1


### Run full test suite
**Test summary mode**:

    ./run.sh test -d nvme0n1

**Test detailed mode with nvme dev nvme0n1**:

    ./run.sh test -m detailed -d nvme0n1

**Test detailed mode against fio container**:

    ./run.sh test -m detailed -c fio-container
